While it reaches for the stars, director Christopher Nolan's Interstellar is a flawed masterpiece.
The story is ever-ambitious, sometimes riveting and thought-provoking, but also plodding and hokey and not as visionary as its cutting-edge special effects.
And at nearly three hours, the film would have benefited from more judicious editing (*** out of four; rated PG-13; opens in select cities Nov. 5, nationwide Nov. 7).
It's rare that a big-budget studio movie has such cerebral aspirations and such startling strengths and weaknesses.
The visual spectacle can be breathtaking, but the emotional, earth-bound saga fails to be as moving.
It's a heady tale about gravity and wormholes blended with a family melodrama.
Last year's Gravity touched on similar turf, but Interstellar blows the concept out in more complex — though sometimes more tedious — fashion.
For most laypeople, it's best not to get too caught up in the logistics.
Just go with the notion of mind-blowing space travel necessitated by an impending apocalypse on Earth.
Dirt storms have ravaged the U.S.
The world is nearly out of food.
The hardiest crop appears to be corn.
Rows of stalks thrive in a landscape that looks both familiar and eerie.
The story isn't set at any specific date and feels as though it could happen next month, based on the architecture, clothing and cars.
Cooper (Matthew McConaughey) was once a top pilot.
He has two children, Murphy (played as a child by Mackenzie Foy and as an adult by Jessica Chastain), and Tom (played in youth by Timothee Chalamet and later by Casey Affleck).
Living in a world devastated by environmental blight, Cooper stumbles on what's left of NASA and meets his old mentor, Prof.
Brand (Michael Caine), whose daughter is engineer Amelia Brand (Anne Hathaway).
Professor Brand has determined that Earth faces imminent extinction and that Cooper is the planet's last hope.
He asks him to pilot a space vessel beyond the reaches of space and time to ascertain if other planets could be habitable for Earthlings.
Complicating matters for Cooper is his devotion to his two children.
The key dilemma he faces is whether to stay with his family — and thereby save them — or save the world.
It's a fascinating conundrum posed by writers Christopher and Jonathan Nolan.
The bond between father and daughter, in particular, as beautifully played by McConaughey and Foy, is stirring.
Cooper decides he must undertake the mission, in the hopes of saving the species.
He's accompanied by Amelia, Doyle (Wes Bentley) and Romilly (David Gyasi) on an operation to slip through a wormhole near Saturn and search for planets that can sustain human life.
A widower, Cooper leaves his kids in care of their grandfather (John Lithgow), aware he may never see them again.
Another of the film's powerful themes is the idea that science and exploration have been set aside in a struggle for basic survival.
It's a sobering notion.
Along the way, monotonous stretches in space undercut the story's time-bending grandeur, as do minimalist exchanges between McConaughey and Hathaway, whose chemistry as space-exploring partners is lacking.
Hathaway's character is not given much dimension.
Other members of the space team are even less well-drawn, so it's hard to care what befalls them.
What little we see of the ravaged Earth is more compelling in some ways than the cosmic canvas.
The film could have used more grounded scenes.
But it seems in a hurry to get to space.
Once space and time are transcended, the film flounders.
Dull dialogue and tedious patches inside the space vessel provides a stumbling block.
What is meant as a climactic humanistic ending seems to tie things up far too neatly for a film about the complex messiness that comes with a world that has taken dramatic wrong turns.
Though its heart and mind are in the right place, for a space epic aiming for profound resonance, Interstellar falls short.
